README.md, before:

# Book'em

A modern, responsive book finder application that allows users to discover and explore millions of books from the Open Library database. Built with React and featuring a clean, minimalist design with advanced search capabilities and optimized performance.

## Overview

Book'em is a comprehensive book discovery platform that provides instant access to one of the world's largest open book databases. The application features intelligent search functionality, detailed book information, and an intuitive user interface designed for book enthusiasts and casual readers alike.

### Key Highlights
- **Instant Search**: Real-time book search with debounced input for optimal performance
- **Multi-criteria Search**: Search by title, author, subject, ISBN, or publisher
- **Smart Cover Loading**: Advanced 7-step fallback system for book covers with background hydration
- **Responsive Design**: Clean, modern interface optimized for all device sizes
- **Performance Optimized**: Two-stage API hydration for instant UI response with progressive enhancement

## Tech Stack

### Frontend
- **React 18** - Modern UI library with hooks and functional components
- **Vite** - Fast build tool and development server
- **Tailwind CSS v4** - Utility-first CSS framework with modern styling
- **React Lazy Load Image Component** - Performance-optimized image loading

### Typography & Design
- **Inter Font Family** - Modern, readable typography
- **Clean Architecture** - Minimalist black/white/grey theme
- **Responsive Grid Layouts** - Adaptive layouts for different screen sizes

### APIs & Services
- **Open Library API** - Primary data source for book information
- **Open Library Covers API** - Book cover images with multiple fallback methods
- **Works & Editions API** - Enhanced metadata retrieval for better cover availability

### State Management & Performance
- **Custom React Hooks** - Modular state management (useBookSearch, useDebounce)
- **Debounced Search** - Optimized API calls to prevent excessive requests
- **Background Hydration** - Progressive enhancement of search results
- **Lazy Loading** - Optimized image loading with intersection observer

## Project Directory Structure

```
Book'em/
├── public/
│   ├── vite.svg
│   └── ...
├── src/
│   ├── components/
│   │   ├── BookCard.jsx          # Individual book display component
│   │   ├── BookCover.jsx         # Smart cover loading with 7-step fallback
│   │   ├── BookDetailModal.jsx   # Detailed book information modal
│   │   ├── BookList.jsx          # Grid layout for search results
│   │   ├── Header.jsx            # Application header with branding
│   │   ├── Loader.jsx            # Loading states and skeletons
│   │   └── SearchBar.jsx         # Multi-criteria search interface
│   ├── hooks/
│   │   ├── useBookSearch.js      # Search state management with hydration
│   │   └── useDebounce.js        # Input debouncing for performance
│   ├── services/
│   │   └── openLibrary.js        # API integration with two-stage hydration
│   ├── utils/
│   │   └── coverCache.js         # Caching system for cover URLs
│   ├── App.jsx                   # Main application component
│   ├── App.css                   # Global styles and utilities
│   ├── index.css                 # Tailwind imports and base styles
│   └── main.jsx                  # React application entry point
├── index.html                    # HTML template
├── package.json                  # Dependencies and scripts
├── postcss.config.js            # PostCSS configuration
├── tailwind.config.js           # Tailwind CSS configuration
├── vite.config.js               # Vite build configuration
└── README.md                    # Project documentation
```

## Features

### Advanced Search Capabilities
- **Multi-criteria Search**: Search by title, author, subject, ISBN, or publisher
- **Real-time Results**: Debounced search with instant feedback
- **Smart Suggestions**: Quick access buttons for popular searches (Ruskin Bond, Stephen King, etc.)
- **Auto-search**: Automatic search as you type with optimized API calls

### Rich Book Information
- **Comprehensive Details**: Title, author, publication year, edition count, ISBN, LCCN, OCLC
- **Book Descriptions**: First sentences and full descriptions when available
- **Subject Classification**: Categorized topics and genres
- **Publication Information**: Publishers, languages, page counts
- **External Links**: Direct links to Open Library and Google search

### Intelligent Cover Loading
- **7-Step Fallback System**: 
  1. Cover ID (fastest, primary method)
  2. Edition Key/OLID (most reliable for website parity)
  3. Primary ISBN lookup
  4. Secondary ISBN fallback
  5. OCLC number lookup
  6. LCCN identifier fallback
  7. Clean "No Cover Available" placeholder
- **Background Hydration**: Progressive enhancement of covers after initial render
- **Performance Monitoring**: Console logging for cover loading success/failure tracking
- **Lazy Loading**: Images load only when visible with intersection observer

### User Experience
- **Clean Design**: Minimalist black/white/grey theme without distractions
- **Responsive Layout**: Optimized for desktop, tablet, and mobile devices
- **Loading States**: Elegant skeleton screens and progress indicators
- **Error Handling**: Graceful error messages with helpful suggestions
- **Accessibility**: Semantic HTML and keyboard navigation support

### Performance Optimizations
- **Two-Stage API Strategy**:
  - Stage 1: Instant UI render with search results
  - Stage 2: Background hydration for enhanced cover availability
- **Debounced Search**: Prevents excessive API calls during typing
- **Image Optimization**: Lazy loading with multiple size variants
- **Concurrent Processing**: Batch hydration with controlled concurrency
- **Caching System**: Smart caching for cover URLs (configurable)

### Technical Features
- **Modern React Patterns**: Functional components with hooks
- **Custom Hook Architecture**: Reusable state management logic
- **API Integration**: RESTful integration with Open Library
- **CORS Handling**: Vite proxy configuration for development
- **Build Optimization**: Production-ready builds with Vite
- **Hot Module Replacement**: Instant updates during development

## Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
- Node.js (v16 or higher)
- npm or yarn package manager

### Quick Start
```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/shreyahhh/Book-em.git
cd Book-em

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Start development server
npm run dev

# Build for production
npm run build

# Preview production build
npm run preview
```

### Development Server
The application will be available at `http://localhost:5173` (or another port if 5173 is in use).

## Usage

### Basic Search
1. Open the application in your browser
2. Use the search bar to enter a book title, author name, or keyword
3. Select the search criteria (Title, Author, Subject, ISBN, Publisher)
4. Results appear automatically as you type

### Detailed View
1. Click on any book card to open the detailed modal
2. View comprehensive book information, covers, and metadata
3. Use "View on Open Library" to access the original source
4. Use "Find Online" to search for the book on Google

### Advanced Features
- **Progressive Enhancement**: Initial results load instantly, covers improve over time
- **Multiple Editions**: View edition counts and publication information
- **Subject Exploration**: Browse books by topics and genres
- **Cross-referencing**: Multiple identifier types for comprehensive search

## API Integration

### Open Library Integration
- **Search Endpoint**: `/search.json` for initial book discovery
- **Works Endpoint**: `/works/{id}.json` for detailed metadata
- **Editions Endpoint**: `/works/{id}/editions.json` for edition information
- **Covers API**: Multiple endpoints for cover image retrieval

### Performance Strategy
- **Instant Render**: Fast initial response with basic book data
- **Background Enhancement**: Progressive improvement of cover availability
- **Fallback Handling**: Multiple cover sources with graceful degradation
- **Error Recovery**: Comprehensive error handling with user feedback

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss what you would like to change.

## License

This project is open source and available under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

## Acknowledgments

- **Open Library** - Providing free access to millions of books
- **Internet Archive** - Supporting the open library initiative
- **React Team** - For the excellent UI library
- **Vite Team** - For the fast build tooling
- **Tailwind CSS** - For the utility-first CSS framework

Commit message:

Remove CodeSandbox setup, add Vercel config and upgrade to React 19/Vite 6

README.md, after:

# Book'em

A modern, responsive book finder application that allows users to discover and explore millions of books from the Open Library database. Built with React and featuring a clean, minimalist design with advanced search capabilities and optimized performance.

## Overview

Book'em is a comprehensive book discovery platform that provides instant access to one of the world's largest open book databases. The application features intelligent search functionality, detailed book information, and an intuitive user interface designed for book enthusiasts and casual readers alike.

### Key Highlights
- **Instant Search**: Real-time book search with debounced input for optimal performance
- **Multi-criteria Search**: Search by title, author, subject, ISBN, or publisher
- **Smart Cover Loading**: Advanced 7-step fallback system for book covers with background hydration
- **Responsive Design**: Clean, modern interface optimized for all device sizes
- **Performance Optimized**: Two-stage API hydration for instant UI response with progressive enhancement

## Tech Stack

### Frontend
- **React 19** - Latest UI library with hooks and functional components
- **Vite 6** - Fast build tool and development server with Rolldown
- **Tailwind CSS v4** - Utility-first CSS framework with modern styling
- **React Lazy Load Image Component** - Performance-optimized image loading

### Typography & Design
- **Inter Font Family** - Modern, readable typography
- **Clean Architecture** - Minimalist black/white/grey theme
- **Responsive Grid Layouts** - Adaptive layouts for different screen sizes

### APIs & Services
- **Open Library API** - Primary data source for book information
- **Open Library Covers API** - Book cover images with multiple fallback methods
- **Works & Editions API** - Enhanced metadata retrieval for better cover availability

### State Management & Performance
- **Custom React Hooks** - Modular state management (useBookSearch, useDebounce)
- **Debounced Search** - Optimized API calls to prevent excessive requests
- **Background Hydration** - Progressive enhancement of search results
- **Lazy Loading** - Optimized image loading with intersection observer

## Project Directory Structure

```
Book'em/
├── public/
│   ├── vite.svg
│   └── ...
├── src/
│   ├── components/
│   │   ├── BookCard.jsx          # Individual book display component
│   │   ├── BookCover.jsx         # Smart cover loading with 7-step fallback
│   │   ├── BookDetailModal.jsx   # Detailed book information modal
│   │   ├── BookList.jsx          # Grid layout for search results
│   │   ├── Header.jsx            # Application header with branding
│   │   ├── Loader.jsx            # Loading states and skeletons
│   │   └── SearchBar.jsx         # Multi-criteria search interface
│   ├── hooks/
│   │   ├── useBookSearch.js      # Search state management with hydration
│   │   └── useDebounce.js        # Input debouncing for performance
│   ├── services/
│   │   └── openLibrary.js        # API integration with two-stage hydration
│   ├── utils/
│   │   └── coverCache.js         # Caching system for cover URLs
│   ├── App.jsx                   # Main application component
│   ├── App.css                   # Global styles and utilities
│   ├── index.css                 # Tailwind imports and base styles
│   └── main.jsx                  # React application entry point
├── index.html                    # HTML template
├── package.json                  # Dependencies and scripts
├── postcss.config.js            # PostCSS configuration
├── tailwind.config.js           # Tailwind CSS configuration
├── vite.config.js               # Vite build configuration
└── README.md                    # Project documentation
```

## Features

### Advanced Search Capabilities
- **Multi-criteria Search**: Search by title, author, subject, ISBN, or publisher
- **Real-time Results**: Debounced search with instant feedback
- **Smart Suggestions**: Quick access buttons for popular searches (Ruskin Bond, Stephen King, etc.)
- **Auto-search**: Automatic search as you type with optimized API calls

### Rich Book Information
- **Comprehensive Details**: Title, author, publication year, edition count, ISBN, LCCN, OCLC
- **Book Descriptions**: First sentences and full descriptions when available
- **Subject Classification**: Categorized topics and genres
- **Publication Information**: Publishers, languages, page counts
- **External Links**: Direct links to Open Library and Google search

### Intelligent Cover Loading
- **7-Step Fallback System**: 
  1. Cover ID (fastest, primary method)
  2. Edition Key/OLID (most reliable for website parity)
  3. Primary ISBN lookup
  4. Secondary ISBN fallback
  5. OCLC number lookup
  6. LCCN identifier fallback
  7. Clean "No Cover Available" placeholder
- **Background Hydration**: Progressive enhancement of covers after initial render
- **Performance Monitoring**: Console logging for cover loading success/failure tracking
- **Lazy Loading**: Images load only when visible with intersection observer

### User Experience
- **Clean Design**: Minimalist black/white/grey theme without distractions
- **Responsive Layout**: Optimized for desktop, tablet, and mobile devices
- **Loading States**: Elegant skeleton screens and progress indicators
- **Error Handling**: Graceful error messages with helpful suggestions
- **Accessibility**: Semantic HTML and keyboard navigation support

### Performance Optimizations
- **Two-Stage API Strategy**:
  - Stage 1: Instant UI render with search results
  - Stage 2: Background hydration for enhanced cover availability
- **Debounced Search**: Prevents excessive API calls during typing
- **Image Optimization**: Lazy loading with multiple size variants
- **Concurrent Processing**: Batch hydration with controlled concurrency
- **Caching System**: Smart caching for cover URLs (configurable)

### Technical Features
- **Modern React Patterns**: Functional components with hooks
- **Custom Hook Architecture**: Reusable state management logic
- **API Integration**: RESTful integration with Open Library
- **CORS Handling**: Vite proxy configuration for development
- **Build Optimization**: Production-ready builds with Vite
- **Hot Module Replacement**: Instant updates during development

## Installation & Setup

### Prerequisites
- Node.js (v16 or higher)
- npm or yarn package manager

### Quick Start
```bash
# Clone the repository
git clone https://github.com/shreyahhh/Book-em.git
cd Book-em

# Install dependencies
npm install

# Start development server
npm run dev

# Build for production
npm run build

# Preview production build
npm run preview
```

### Development Server
The application will be available at `http://localhost:5173` (or another port if 5173 is in use).

## Deployment

### Deploy to Vercel
This project is optimized for deployment on Vercel with zero configuration:

1. **Fork/Clone the repository**
2. **Connect to Vercel**:
   - Go to [vercel.com](https://vercel.com)
   - Import your GitHub repository
   - Vercel will automatically detect it as a Vite project
3. **Deploy**: Click deploy - no additional configuration needed!

The project includes a `vercel.json` file for optimal SPA routing and static asset handling.

### Manual Deployment
```bash
# Build the project
npm run build

# Deploy the dist/ folder to any static hosting provider
# (Netlify, GitHub Pages, Firebase Hosting, etc.)
```

## Usage

### Basic Search
1. Open the application in your browser
2. Use the search bar to enter a book title, author name, or keyword
3. Select the search criteria (Title, Author, Subject, ISBN, Publisher)
4. Results appear automatically as you type

### Detailed View
1. Click on any book card to open the detailed modal
2. View comprehensive book information, covers, and metadata
3. Use "View on Open Library" to access the original source
4. Use "Find Online" to search for the book on Google

### Advanced Features
- **Progressive Enhancement**: Initial results load instantly, covers improve over time
- **Multiple Editions**: View edition counts and publication information
- **Subject Exploration**: Browse books by topics and genres
- **Cross-referencing**: Multiple identifier types for comprehensive search

## API Integration

### Open Library Integration
- **Search Endpoint**: `/search.json` for initial book discovery
- **Works Endpoint**: `/works/{id}.json` for detailed metadata
- **Editions Endpoint**: `/works/{id}/editions.json` for edition information
- **Covers API**: Multiple endpoints for cover image retrieval

### Performance Strategy
- **Instant Render**: Fast initial response with basic book data
- **Background Enhancement**: Progressive improvement of cover availability
- **Fallback Handling**: Multiple cover sources with graceful degradation
- **Error Recovery**: Comprehensive error handling with user feedback

## Contributing

Contributions are welcome! Please feel free to submit a Pull Request. For major changes, please open an issue first to discuss what you would like to change.

## License

This project is open source and available under the [MIT License](LICENSE).

## Acknowledgments

- **Open Library** - Providing free access to millions of books
- **Internet Archive** - Supporting the open library initiative
- **React Team** - For the excellent UI library
- **Vite Team** - For the fast build tooling
- **Tailwind CSS** - For the utility-first CSS framework
